Between the first submission and the final defense of this thesis, some significant modifications were made to the prototype. These modifications are mostly feature enhancements, but I also reflected on my initial position on the ethics of *tracking*. This postscriptum pays account to both.

As Atom is still in very active development, some changes to the underlying architecture and the APIs are to be expected. The updated version of the prototype makes use of a new editor component, which offers better performance, and a new API for setting so-called *markers*. Markers depict positions in the text file (row and column), which are then used by the Scope Inspector to highlight the current scope. However, the new marker API does not allow to place hoisting indicators as easily as before, which is why they have been disabled for the time being.

In response to the feedback gathered during user testing, three more features were added.

* Users can now independently enable and disable all three UI features of the Scope Inspector: scope highlighting, the sidebar, and the bottom bar. This aligns with the *modularity* characteristic, as identified in chapter \ref{exploration}.
* The sidebar can be used to navigate around the source code. By clicking on a scope title or a scoped variable, the cursor jumps to beginning of the scope or the variable definition, respectively. This feature is commonly known as “jump to definition” in IDEs.
* A most critical feature, the *on-the-fly* re-evaluation of the scope structure was implemented as well. Once the user has stopped typing for `n` milliseconds (200 by default), the scope structure is evaluated again. Formerly, the Scope Inspector would only re-evaluate when saving the file.

In addition to the modifications described above, some small usability enhancements were implemented. The bottom bar was made thinner in order to save vertical screen space, and the individual “breadcrumbs”, which were formerly buttons, now resemble breadcrumbs on websites more closely. In the sidebar, a subtle hint is added in case a scope is empty; formerly, the Scope Inspector would just display the scope’s title.

The prototype’s new version also reflects a change in my position towards tracking (in this particular case). The original prototype offered metrics tracking via opt-in; the new version, however, enables tracking by default (for new installations) and offers opt-out. I revised my concerns towards tracking, as all data being tracked are completely anonymous and can never lead back to a specific user. Quite the opposite, these data are only useful as aggregates. This way of collecting metrics is common practice in design research. The privacy of any users are not invaded using this technique, and its use is clearly communicated in the repository and the Atom plugin directory.

After this change in policy, the analytics show that the Scope Inspector is in fact used daily by at least some people (as of December 2014, about 10 users on the weekend to up to 40 users during a weekday). Enabling the tracking proves to be invaluable for evaluating usability from a quantitative perspective. The sidebar is enabled and disabled more often than any other component in the Scope Inspector; one can conclude that it is opened *on demand*, whenever a user wants to have a deeper insight into the scope structure of a JavaScript file. Users do not use the “jump to definition” functionality much; its existence should probably be made more clear. The bottom bar, however, seems to be mostly  activated. A possible reason is that it gives the user a quick overview about her position in the scope chain and allows for quick preview of and navigation to outer scopes, without taking up too much screen real estate.
